docs: Add a guide for deploying Redpanda in AKS (#1125)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/deploy/deployment-option/self-hosted/kubernetes/aks-guide.mdx

* You must satisfy the prerequisites listed in the [AKS quickstart](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-cli#prerequisites)
to get access to the Azure CLI.

* [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/). Minimum required Kubernetes version: <Versions name="kubernetes"/>

  ```bash
  kubectl version
  ```

* [Helm](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/). Minimum required Helm version: <Versions name="helm"/>

  ```bash
  helm version
  ```

## Create an AKS cluster

In this step, you create three worker nodes: one worker node for each Redpanda broker. You also configure your AKS cluster to give each worker node a public IP address and allow external access to the node ports on which the Redpanda deployment will be exposed. You'll use these public IP addresses later in this guide to configure external access to your Redpanda cluster.

1. Create a resource group for Redpanda:

  ```bash
  az group create --name redpandaResourceGroup --location eastus
  ```

1. Create an AKS cluster with three worker nodes (one for each Redpanda broker):

  ```bash
  az aks create -g redpandaResourceGroup -n redpanda \

>     --node-count 1 \

Author: ```suggestion
    --node-count 3 \
```

---
title: Deploy a Redpanda Cluster in Azure Kubernetes Service
---

<head>
    <meta name="title" content="Deploy a Redpanda Cluster in Google Kubernetes Engine | Redpanda Docs"/>
    <meta name="description" content="Set up a three-broker Redpanda cluster in Azure Kubernetes Service (GKE)."/>
</head>

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Versions from '../../../../shared/_versions.mdx'
import InstallRpkHomebrew from "../../../../get-started/shared/_install-rpk-homebrew.mdx"
import InstallRpkLinux from "../../../../get-started/shared/_install-rpk-linux.mdx"

> Deploy a Redpanda cluster and Redpanda Console in Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) using the Helm chart. Then, use rpk both as an internal client and an external client to interact with your Redpanda cluster from the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic explains how to deploy a Redpanda cluster and Redpanda Console in Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) using the Helm chart. After you deploy, use rpk both as an internal client and an external client to interact with your Redpanda cluster from the command line.
```

## Prerequisites

> Make sure that you have the prerequisites that are listed in the [AKS quickstart](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-cli#prerequisites)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must satisfy the prerequisites listed in the [AKS quickstart](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/learn/quick-kubernetes-deploy-cli#prerequisites)
```

  ```

1. Get your subscription ID:

  ```bash
  export SUBSCRIPTION_ID=$(az account show --query id --output tsv)
  ```

1. Set up a connection to your AKS cluster:

  ```bash
  az account set --subscription $SUBSCRIPTION_ID
  az aks get-credentials --resource-group redpandaResourceGroup --name redpanda
  ```

## Deploy Redpanda

1. Install Redpanda using Helm:

  ```bash
  helm repo add redpanda https://charts.redpanda.com/
  helm repo update
  helm install redpanda redpanda/redpanda \
    --namespace redpanda \
    --create-namespace \
    --set external.type=null
  ```

  :::note
  On AKS, you cannot access individual worker nodes through a NodePort Service.
  The `external.type=null` configuration overrides the default value in the Helm chart to stop the default NodePort Service from being created.
  :::

  The installation displays some tips for getting started.

1. Wait for the Redpanda cluster to be ready:

  ```bash
  kubectl -n redpanda rollout status statefulset redpanda --watch
  ```

  When the Redpanda cluster is ready, the output should look similar to the following:

  ```text
  statefulset rolling update complete 3 pods at revision redpanda-8654f645b4...
  ```

>   If your cluster remains in a pending state, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If your cluster remains in a pending state, see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting).
```

  </details>

## Deploy Redpanda Console

Redpanda Console is a developer-friendly web UI for managing and debugging your Redpanda cluster and your applications.

Install Redpanda Console using Helm:

```bash
helm repo add redpanda 'https://charts.redpanda.com/'
helm repo update
helm install redpanda-console redpanda/console \
  --namespace redpanda \
  --create-namespace \
  --set console.config.kafka.brokers=redpanda-0.redpanda.redpanda.svc.cluster.local.:9093 \
  --set service.type=LoadBalancer \
  --set service.targetPort=8080
```

- `--namespace redpanda`: Deploy Redpanda Console in the same namespace as your Redpanda cluster so that it can access the brokers using their internal FQDNs.
-  `--set console.config.kafka.brokers=redpanda-0.redpanda.redpanda.svc.cluster.local.:9093`: The Redpanda broker to which Redpanda Console connects to get information from the Redpanda cluster.
- `--set service.type=LoadBalancer`: The Service that Redpanda Console should be exposed to. A LoadBalancer Service allows you to access Redpanda Console from outside Kubernetes.
- `--set service.targetPort=8080` The port on which the Redpanda Console container expects traffic.

## Start streaming

> Each Redpanda broker comes with rpk, which is a CLI tool for connecting to and interacting with Redpanda brokers. You can use rpk inside one of the Redpanda broker's Docker containers to create a topic, produce messages to it, and consume messages from it.

Reviewer: Make "rpk" a link to the rpk docs?

    <InstallRpkHomebrew/>

  </TabItem>
  </Tabs>

1. Set the `REDPANDA_BROKERS` environment variable to the external IP addresses of your LoadBalancer Services:

  ```bash
  export REDPANDA_BROKERS=203.0.113.3:9092,203.0.113.5:9092,203.0.113.7:9092
  ```

  :::note
  9092 is the Kafka API port that's exposed by the load balancers.
  :::

1. Get the cluster info:

  ```bash
  rpk cluster info
  ```

  <details>
  <summary>
  Example output
  </summary>

  ```text
  CLUSTER
  =======
  redpanda.ad4a2f55-f34e-4a7f-babd-01d392cf4e80

  BROKERS
  =======
  ID    HOST           PORT
  0     203.0.113.3    9092
  1*    203.0.113.5    9092
  2     203.0.113.7    9092
  ```

  </details>

## Troubleshooting

### StatefulSet never rolls out

If the StatefulSet Pods remain in a pending state, they may be waiting for resources to become available:

* Make sure that you have a default StorageClass available in your Kubernetes cluster and that the underlying volumes have at least 20Gi of storage capacity.

  ```bash
  kubectl get storageclass
  ```

### dig not defined

`Error: parse error at (redpanda/templates/statefulset.yaml:203): function "dig" not defined`

> If you see this error, make sure that you are using the correct version of Helm. See the [prerequisites](#prerequisites).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see this error, make sure that you are using the correct version of Helm. See the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites).
```
